[Music]
the view of a rust-colored rocket
carrying an orbiter on its back spewing
giant clouds of smoke and rushing to the
sky on his fiery tail is iconic but
considering the last space shuttle
launch was back in 2011 is this the last
we'll ever see of such a thing what
snags could an improve shuttle be made
that takes off in lands like an airplane
well let's explore the possibilities use
your imagination to draw two parallel
horizontal lines now connect these lines
at any point you want in two different
ways with a vertical line that goes
straight from the bottom line to the top
one and with a diagonal line which line
is shorter of course the vertical one
it's the shortest route to connect the
top and bottom lines with each other and
that's also the most basic answer to a
question it's faster and easier to get
into orbit by just going straight up
from the ground the bottom line is the
Earth's surface our planet is a complex
hodgepodge of all kinds of matter which
is combined into an impressive mass
almost six sextillion tons this likes
six thousand billions of billions lots
of zeroes there just like my middle
school math scores all that math
basically works like a colossal magnet
that besides other significant feats
allows the earth to maintain one thing
we all know and love the atmosphere the
top line is the limit of the Earth's
atmosphere anything beyond that is the
planetary orbit and outer space but the
atmosphere itself is also filled with
matter it's a combination of gas that
has its own density when a shuttle is
launched all the mass of this gas was
constantly pushing on it which caused
friction effectively slowing it down
going through a vacuum is like cutting
through the air whereas getting through
the atmosphere is like going through
jelly whoa grape or strawberry it took a
lot of energy and force to get through
it
while being pulled back by that giant
gravitational magnet called Earth
airplanes don't struggle this much with
getting through the atmosphere because
they use its density to lift up from the
ground and maintain altitude to things
help them with that the thrust of their
engines and the form of their wings the
wings of an airplane forced the air in
front of them to split into two streams
naturally these streams want to reunite
behind the wing but the shape of it
makes the upper stream go faster the
faster the air goes the less dense it
becomes and that means that the air
stream that goes underneath the wing is
denser than the upper one this creates a
gradual lift for the airplane basically
wings make it so that the airplane can
glide on the air but of course that
wouldn't be possible without a huge
force pushing the airplane along this is
what thrust is for just to take off from
the ground and the airplane needs to
attain a huge speed
the speed varies enormous ly between
different kinds of airplanes 60 miles an
hour for light planes and about a
hundred fifty miles per hour for
airliners and just to take off and climb
to 10,000 feet the Boeing 747 needs a
little less than three tons of fuel that
may sound impressive but let's look at
that Space Shuttle the first obvious
things are the cute tiny stubby wings
that wouldn't be of any use for a
horizontal takeoff but if one was built
with more excessive wings they wouldn't
be of any use in the vacuum of space it
would also be hard to make them sturdy
enough to make it through the launching
process the little wings of a space
shuttle served only one purpose to lamb
a shuttle safely so it could be reused
in future missions they were just big
enough to prevent the shuttle from
spinning uncontrollably during the
descent through the atmosphere and to
glide it to the ground it didn't utilize
any engine operations during landing at
all the engines of the space shuttle
were nothing like the engines of a plank
the airplanes engines needed air from
the atmosphere to work the shuttles
engines obviously didn't since
atmospheric air would have been hard to
find in space instead the shuttle used
rocket engines to show at rocket means
here and how these engines work just
blow up a balloon and release it from
your hand it'll fly around until there's
no air left inside all the while being
pushed in the opposite direction as the
air coming out to fly up a rocket engine
has to throw off enough thrust and burn
the right amount of fuel to do the job
in fact space shuttles needed so much
fuel during their ascent to make enough
thrust that they couldn't do it on its
three engines alone they needed to
additional solid rocket boosters and a
huge separate fuel tank that was
jettisoned at the final stage of the
launch and a shuttle would only go into
orbit if it had enough power the power
of a shuttle with three engines and two
boosters is around 7.8 million pounds of
thrust to power up this much push an
external tank held
around 1.6 million pounds of rocket fuel
and to keep the flight under control
those three engines had to be
mind-numbing ly complicated in structure
but would it be even possible to fly a
shuttle into orbit if it was modified to
use the atmosphere like planes well
unfortunately the answer is no it would
take even more fuel to maintain the
needed speed for the distance of a
diagonal launching trajectory the thing
is even if a plane climbs to the upper
part of the atmosphere the earth still
won't let it get away to escape the
atmosphere any object that starts from
the earth would have to be fast enough
to cross the point of so-called escape
velocity this velocity is needed to
overpower the gravitational pull of the
planet and let an object go into orbit
for our planet this orbital speed is
17,500 miles per hour it's obviously way
faster than the speed of sound and many
many times faster than the cruising
speed of an airliner now try to imagine
an aircraft that goes this fast and how
much fuel it would require on top of
that it have to be sturdy enough to keep
itself in one piece while doing so the
cost and complicated technology would
just be unrealistic the possibility that
shuttles have become a thing of the past
has caused scientists and engineers
alike to try to find even better
solutions for getting into orbit and
beyond one such idea proposes that in
the future people would be able to go to
space on a huge space elevator a space
elevator is the concept of a huge tower
that connects to a satellite at the top
which moves in line with the rotational
movement of the earth itself the tower
is supposed to be about 22,000 miles
high and made of extremely durable
material carbon nanotubes the platform
inside the tower is planned to be set in
motion via electromagnetic powered
vehicles the trip from Earth to the
satellite would take just five hours
this mega structure would allow for a
cheaper and safer way of getting into
space but carbon nanotubes were proved
not sturdy enough for building a tower
this you
so the search for an ideal material
continues another project that uses a
similar approach is called a space tram
the structure needed to launch this
project isn't as big but still quite
impressive it's a vertical vacuum tunnel
that pushes a magnetically levitated
shuttle it won't be slowed down by the
air and it'll be pushed and accelerated
with an electromagnetic force through
the tunnel it'll then shoot into the
skies at a speed close to escape
velocity the shuttle powered by this
tunnel will weigh less because it won't
need to carry a lot of fuel no word yet
on how human beings would survive such
acceleration writers might look like
pancakes upon arrival if these ideas
sound strange to you and they do then
get ready for the last one it's possible
that people will use planes as a way of
getting into orbit no I didn't lie to
you previously the plane won't go into
space by itself instead it'll be used as
a launch platform even better huh
for this purpose a special aircraft will
be made with an almost 400 foot wingspan
and capable of climbing to an altitude
of 35,000 feet small shuttles launched
from this aircraft won't have to go
through so much of the thick atmosphere
making it easier for them to get out
from the gravitational pull of the earth
Richard Branson is working on this
technique right now with this Virgin
Galactic program to take tourists to the
edge of space sounds exciting
so could air planes replace space
shuttles altogether no but that doesn't
mean they won't help them become more
effective in the future hey if you
learned something new today then give
the video a like and share it with a
friend and here are some other cool
videos I think you'll enjoy just click
to the left or right and remember stay
on the bright side of life